-Mining of every block is much slower, especially with the wrong tool or by hand
- blocks of wood only have a 50% chance of dropping a wood block. Otherwise they will drop 1 or 2 sticks
- log to plank ratio is 1:2 instead of 1:4, plank to stick is 2:2, aka 1:1
- getting seeds from grass is less likely
- when harvesting wheat, there is a 50% chance of getting 1 wheat and 1 seed, a 25% chance of getting 2 seeds, 10% chance of getting 1 seed, and 10% chance of getting nothing
- same as above for carrots and potatoes except seeds are the same as the product, so 50% of 2 potatoes for example 
- similarly, there is only a 75% chance of an animal getting hearts triggered when clicked on by their breeding plant. It still consumes the plant, and the attempt can be retried immediately, so it will just cost more to breed animals
- chickens will drop 10% of the eggs they currently do to be consistent with this breeding difficulty. 
- cooking things in the furnace will take longer
- sprinting and jumping take more food than normal
- raw food such as carrots and melons are worth half as much as normal
- eating too much of the same food makes it less effective
- eating different kinds of food increases max health
- riding a horse and boats causes some hunger while riding in a minecart does not
- hay bales craft down to just 4 wheat even though they take 9 to make

New version: hard mode
The idea with this is that it replaces the vanilla hard mode with something that makes all aspects of the game a bit harder and more in depth, not just the fighting. This is supposed to encourage collaboration and progression. Most of the above mentioned changes will be there, along with or  replaced by these

- natural healing will only take place when sleeping with at least a mostly full stomach, rather than all the time
- hunger constantly goes down on addition to the normal cost of strenuous activities
- food is generally worth more and they are split up into these groups, to help simulate having three square meals a day:
      - full meals: (8 pops) 1 slice of cake, pumpkin pie, golden carrots, golden apples
      - main dishes (5 pops) cooked meats, bread, stews, baked potatoes
      - sides (3 pops) carrots, apples, melon slices, beets, cookies 
      - snacks (1 pop) mushrooms, flowers, berries
- one of the things that discourages just using lots of sides or snacks is that eating takes a bit longer than vanilla, which adds up when you're eating a lot
- transportation/storage of goods will be harder. The stack size will be used as a way to simulate the size/weight of the item. For example, big solid blocks like dirt or cobble only stack to 16 while small things like sticks stack to 64
- mining ores will have another step. When mining an ore, you get a cobblestone with __ ore block instead of just the ore. And you guessed it, this block only stacks to 16. To extract the ore you have to place this block next to a water source and after a minute the block will change to gravel with ore and you can mine it with a shovel to get gravel and the ore
- smelting will remain mostly the same, except for a bonus for smelting many things in a row. Essentially the more consecutive items that are smelted the more efficient and fast it is
       - starting a fire in a cold furnace, the fuels are worth this much for one item: 1 coal, 2 wood, 3 planks, or 4 sticks. After one item has been finished, 1 coal can produce 2 items and for 1 item it takes 1 wood, 2 planks, or 3 sticks. On item 4, coal can now do 4 items, wood 2, 1 plank or 3 sticks 1. After smelting 8 items, coal can now do 8 items and the rest are unchanged. After 64 consecutive items smelted one piece of coal can now do 10 items
- plants grow faster and have better yield in the right biomes. They also grow even when chunks aren't loaded by just applying the right amount of growth when they get loaded, meaning you can visit farms all around your map to collect different things. 
- similarly, trees are effected by the biomes. When in the right biomes, trees have a somewhat rare chance of spawning saplings on the ground near them every morning. This is the only way to consistently increase tree population as saplings falling from leaves will be rare and usually only enough to maintain a population, basically 1.05 sapling chance per tree. Trees also will grow very slowly when not in the right biome. In general, natural tree growth will be much slower than vanilla, so either going further for wood or using lots of bonemeal will be necessary
- as a way of getting better transportation earlier, there will be a crude rail made of cobblestone and sticks which has a max speed about .75x the vanilla tracks. There also would be a crude powered rail which requires no redstone and can't be turned on or off. It is made with water and some kemp, and it takes three of them to go from zero to max crude rail speed. There would be an intermediate powered rail made with copper instead of gold. This one can be powered on and off by redstone, and it only takes 2 to reach max crude rail speed. Once the player does choose to use the vanilla rails and powered rails, they will be about 1.25x the power they would normally be, making the expense worth it
- animals' breeding timer would count on them being able to move. In other words if they start to get too crammed together breeding times will start going up. And if they can't move at all then they will never be able to breed. 
- taming horses will be more difficult. Similar to cats, you have to sneak up to keep them from running away and then give them food. After doing this a few times the horse will become friendly to you and no longer run away. After this you can now do the normal riding baresaddle while it tries to buck you off to tame it. It will take much longer than in vanilla and take a lot of food. And if you pause for too long you lose your progress. Also if you try and ride a horse that's not yet friendly to you then you will reverse any progress you've made in gaining their trust. Also, falling off a horse or getting kicked by startling it too close will cause you damage. Once you have a horse tamed it will be much easier to tame other horses as you can herd them into a pen and tame them there, because they run away from you still while you are on a horse
- you can't simply steal food from villages. Most villagers have either a sword or crossbow in their sleeves and will chase you out of town if you steal or break anything. If you kill a villager, they will do everything they can to kill you and will attempt to do so if you ever come near the village again. So if you want their resources you have to either grab and run, conquer the whole village, or just trade with them.
- better early game trades will be available so villages can be a good source of food
- monsters will largely be the same except for a grouping mechanic
- basically sometimes a little hut will spawn in the dark in the world. At night, when loaded that hut will always spawn a certain monster which is the leader of a group. If the hut is not destroyed more huts will be created nearby which similarly provide monsters to the group. These monsters will work together to protect their leader and their homes, and use better strategies to make life difficult for you. A fully formed army should not be attacked by one player at night, even with the best equipment. Luckily above ground monster towns can be dealt with during the day, but be warned they will all come out and attack if one hut is attacked, even if they will get burned. Underground monster towns are even harder to deal with, and would need some creative use of tnt, lava, or the like if in single player.
- at the beginning of the game you are given a talisman which will determine what happens when you die. You can put an item in the talisman which will be burned up on death giving different results based on quality. If no item is in the talisman you are basically in hardcore mode! Death will delete your save game or kick you permanently out of the world if in multiplayer. Most items will give you a normal Minecraft death however. Slightly nicer things like ingots or foods will protect your items in a little box for you. A diamond or ender eye will be like keep inventory is turned on. A nether star or similar will give you yellow hearts and another chance
- just to clarify, every tool will be as effective as it's downgraded equivalent, so a stone pick will be as effective as a vanilla wooden pick. Using your hands on anything a tool can be used for will be painfully slow and occasionally deal minor damage
- to encourage path building, running on natural materials like dirt, sand, and netherrack will cost normal hunger but materials like pathing, wood or stone have a discount
- any seed can be gotten by breaking grass in the right biome, though they are rare
- to get more seeds, if a plant is broken by a hoe in a stage other than the first one or fully mature, it yields the same table but replace the output with just seeds. So I guess carrots and potatoes will need seed variants
- barrels will be useful for something. They can store in better mass quantities. They would have half the slots of a chest but anything can stack to 64 in them, so if used for the right stuff it can still store twice as much as a chest. And instead of connecting sideways they connect up and down to create upright barrels/silos. Two barrels have the slots of a chest but everything stacks 64. 4 barrels still have chest slots but stack to 128. 8 barrels same slots but stack to 256
- on death you get an effect which changes depending on how many times you've died. The effects would be slowness, hunger, and wither of 1 heart
- The only ways to get health back without sleeping is through your pets. Petting your dog or cat can give you one half heart per day per animal type. Similarly, your parrot dancing to music has the same effect.